---
layout: tut
title: "Introduction to Tableau (2)"
---

# Before we begin...

* Do you have the most recent version of Tableau Public installed? [Click to download](https://public.tableau.com/en-us/s/download/thanks)

* Download workbook from [Tableau Public](https://public.tableau.com/profile/solbrigm#!/vizhome/kagglehousing/DashboardAction). Download Workbook link is in the top corner of the workbook.

# About Tableau

Tableau helps people see and understand data.

It can be used to make really pretty visualizations, as [Jonni Walker](https://public.tableau.com/profile/jonni.walker#!/) does. 

It can be used as way to disseminate reports that update frequently, as [Redfin](https://www.redfin.com/blog/data-center) does.

It can be used for interactive maps [Brexit](https://public.tableau.com/profile/solbrigm#!/vizhome/BrexitResults/EUReferendumResults)

Today, we use Tableau to explore data with maps.

## Interacting with Tableau
1. Download workbook from [Tableau Public](https://public.tableau.com/profile/solbrigm#!/vizhome/kagglehousing/DashboardAction)
2. Open Workbook in Tableau Public
3. Pause for definitions:
    * Marks Card: Chart type
    * Show Me
    * Shelfs: Rows, Columns, Color, Size

### Challenge 1
The 'Price by ZipCode' sheet is attempting to compare the price of homes across different zipcodes. In what way does it do this well? In what ways is it doing it poorly? Spend some time trying to make it better.

## Dashboards
* Basic Dashboard creation
* Dashboard Action
* Dashboard Action Dialog

### Challenge 2
Together: Add the 'Actions: Bar Chart' sheet to the 'Actions: Dashboard' Dashboard. Add a Filter action to the dashboard, and then use the Dashboard > Actions dialog to create a filter action between the two sheets.

Independent: Add the 'Actions: Date' sheet to the dashboard as well. Add a dashboard action that Filters only the 'Actions: Date' sheet when the user clicks either the map or the bar chart.

Extra Challenge: Use the Layout tab on the left to start formatting the dashboard.

## Filters
* Filters Shelf
* Filter Formatting
* Pages Shelf

### Challenge 3
Together: Add a "Bedrooms" Filter to the "Filter: Distribution" Sheet. Make it appear on the 'Filter: Dashboard" dashboard, and apply to all sheets.

Independent: Add a "Bedrooms" filter to the "Filter: Distribution" Sheet as well, and add it to the dashboard.

Extra Challenge: Use the Layout tab to make the dashboard look nicer. Add some other filters to the dashboard. Go back to the 'Actions' dashboard and add some actions there as well.



## Calculations
* Dashboard actions Dialog

### Challenge 3
* The Cost per sqft Dash tries to show how the cost per sqft changes depending on zip code. However, whenever it filters the data below, it is very jolting. Use the Dashboard > Actions menu to create a highlight action instead of a filter action.

## Calculated Fields
* Analysis > Create Calculated Field
* Parameters

### Challenge 4
* It would be much better if the zip codes were colored by average cost per sq ft, to make a more unified message. Create a calculated field to compute price per sqft, and color the map using that instead. Advanced: Also create a new sheet that displays the price per sqft, and create a filter action from the Map to the new sheet so that it displays the correct value for a selected zipcode.

# Part 2: Mapping Specifically

## Geographic Field Types

* Automatically Recognized Fields: City, County, State
* Not Recognized: Metro
* Edit Locations, 'Ambiguous'
* Geographic Hierarchies (Geometry Field)

### Challenge 5
* Create a State > Country > City hierarchy on the Zillow data.
* Create a map of their Geometries, and filter down to just Seattle Neighborhoods


## Aggregate Geometries???
* Add Size Rank to the color shelf... Why is it all just one color?
* Custom Territories


# Part 3: Data Prep

* [Neighborhood Zillow Data](https://www.zillow.com/research/data/#bulk)
    * Click Neighborhood
    * The dataset is Neighborhood_Zri_AllHomes.csv
* [Neighborhood Boundaries](https://www.zillow.com/howto/api/neighborhood-boundaries.htm)
    * Click Washington Neighborhood Boundaries

## Bring in the data
* Drag and Drop... Woo
* Blending
* Joins: Inner, Outer, Left, Right
* Pivot

# Conclusion

Tableau is fun and easy, and as long as you are OK not connecting to databases and saving everything to the cloud it is free.
